MSC2962: Group Access Control via Spaces in Matrix (#2962)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2962-spaces-access-control.md

space. However, this is effectively a separate concern from how you model spaces
themselves, and so has been split out into a this separate MSC.

## Goals:

 * Set the power levels in a room based on membership of a space
 * Restrict access to a room based on membership of a space
 * Kick users from a room if they leave a space

### Managing power levels via spaces

One use-case for spaces is to help manage power levels across a group of
rooms. For example: "Jim has just joined the management team at my company. He
should have moderator rights across all of the company rooms."

Since the event-authorisation rules cannot easily be extended to consider
membership in other rooms, we must map any changes in space membership onto
real `m.room.power_levels` events.

#### Extending the power_levels event

We now have a mix of manually- and automatically- maintained power-level
data. To support this, we extend the existing `m.room.power_levels` event to
add an `auto_users` key:

```js
{
    "type": "m.room.power_levels",
    "content": {
        "users": {
            "@roomadmin:example.com": 100
        },
        "auto_users": {

>             "@spaceuser1:example.org": 50

Author: @joepie91 commented:

> Couldn't we simply introduce a new state event type, `m.auto_power_level` or so, with the mxid being the statekey and the content being the default power level?

>             "@spaceuser1:example.org": 50

Author: @deepbluev7 commented:

> While so far this hasn't been an issue, I think with spaces you will run into event size limits here. Just adding a community with 10 000 members to the mapping will add 10 000 userids here. Quoting the spec:

> >    The complete event MUST NOT be larger than 65535 bytes

> So if each user has a 4 char mxid, this will put us over the limit. I think spaces should scale to 100 000 users.

@joepie91 commented:

> Couldn't we simply introduce a new state event type, m.auto_power_level or so, with the mxid being the statekey and the content being the default power level?

@Sorunome commented:

> How about leave out users (and auto_users) from the m.room.power_level state event, and then set an m.room.power_level with the state key the mxid and the content

```json
{
  "user": 100,
  "auto_user": 50
}
```

That way we make sure that we completely decouple the infinitly-growing object structure and thus truly allow rooms of unlimited sizes. This would obviously require a new room version and clients would start to have to do stuff depending on room version (promoting / demoting users)

I commented:

> ooh, i like that.

Reviewer: yeah, I like it too. It's orthogonal to spaces though.

The new `auto_users` key is maintained by a bot user, as described below.

`auto_users` is subject to all of the same authorization checks as the existing
`users` key (see https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v1#authorization-rules,
paragraphs 10a, 10d, 10e).

This change necessitates a new room version.

#### Representing the mapping from spaces to power levels

The desired mapping from spaces to power levels is defined in a new state event
type, `m.room.power_level_mappings`. The content should contain a `mappings`
key which is an ordered list, for example:

```js
{
    "type": "m.room.power_level_mappings",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "mappings": [
            {
                "space": "!mods:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"],
                "power_level": 50
            },
            {
                "space": "!users:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"],
                "power_level": 1
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

This means that a new `m.room.power_levels` event would be generated whenever
the membership of either `!mods` or `!users` changes. If a user is in both

> spaces, `!mods` takes priority because that is listed first.

Author: @deepbluev7 commented:

> This basically implements role based permissions via group membership. This means you will needs separate spaces to define different groups of users instead of being able to define permissions inside the group, by assigning everyone a role/powerlevel. I would prefer it, if I could assign who is admin or not on the space level and inherit that to all children. I don't think I see that listed in alternatives?

@Sorunome commented:

> Sadly it are only fake role-based permissions, as it still underlyingly maps to PLs.

> Perhaps it makes sense to look more closely at #2812 before continuing here much?

If `mappings` is not a list, the whole event is ignored. Any entries in the list
which do not match the expected format are ignored.

#### Implementing the mapping

When a new room is created, the server implicitly adds a "room admin bot" to
the room, with the maximum power-level of any of the initial users.
(Homeservers should implement this "bot" internally, rather than requiring
separate software to be installed.)

> It is proposed that this "admin bot" use the special user ID with empty

Author: @t3chguy commented on 26 Nov 2020

> So given that the admin bot is operated by the homeserver of the space-room admin which added the room to the space-room, wouldn't that mean massive inconsistency if the admin-ship of the space-room is spread amongst multiple servers and if one of those servers went down then partial/total permissions sync breakage with no proposed recovery?

@erdnaxeli commented on 26 Nov 2020

> I think the admin bot is operated by the room which created the room, as it is said a few lines up.

@t3chguy commented on 26 Nov 2020

> How would that work given
> * existing rooms can be added to Spaces, those rooms may originate from servers which no longer exist
> * the server which creates the room can still cease to exist and thus that room now being broken

@erdnaxeli commented on 26 Nov 2020

Good questions, I have no idea :D

No matter where the bot is heberged, it could go down. I think we need a way for room's admin to setup a new one. This is actually just inviting the bot and giving it a power level 100. You could invite the one on your HS (assuming you trust your own HS).

Maybe this whole HS's admin bot should be specified alongside this one.

@richvdh commented on 26 Nov 2020

as @erdnaxeli says, the admin bot is part of the HS of the room creator.

and yes, if that server goes away, we have a problem. The solution probably amounts to having more than one admin bot in the room, which in turn means having good answers to "how do they decide which one should actually do the work". Whether the extra bots get automatically added whenever a user on another server is granted PL100, or requiring an explicit operation as @erdnaxeli suggests, is open to debate.

(I also think, though it's not written here, that the idea was that if the room creator left the room, so would the admin bot, to avoid accumulating rooms on the server where there are no real users.)

@ashkitten commented on 26 Nov 2020

it seems to me that there is no good way to actually synchronize the permissions and room state across multiple rooms, but maybe we should rethink if that's actually necessary. would it work to simply introduce inheritance so that when looking up permissions and power levels it would defer to the parent room (with the ability to override that per child room)?

@richvdh commented on 27 Nov 2020

@ashkitten I'm not quite sure what you're suggesting, but it sounds a bit like the dismissed idea at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772/files#diff-cdaa2b5bfe73f40db1903d17b1d242d8caa54d4af81e78e0396a369bcd9a1b90R304-R312?

@deepbluev7 commented on 27 Nov 2020

One of the biggest issues with current groups is, that they are bound to a specific server. spaces via rooms was supposed to fix that, at least someone may have said that at some point. Binding the power_level manipulation to a single server again, sounds like a step in the wrong direction. When you add multiple bots on multiple servers, you then run into the issue, that you need to do conflict resolution. Which means you are basically implementing state res a level above normal state res. I think it would be much more natural to extend state res to work across multiple rooms instead in a few specific cases. Yes, that is complicated, but it gives you a lot more tools to work with and can be useful for community only join rules as well. Otherwise you don't really need the bot user, you could just as well implement all of this clientside without reserving special IDs (well, for the most part, admins would need to join all rooms).

@richvdh commented on 27 Nov 2020

> I think it would be much more natural to extend state res to work across multiple rooms instead in a few specific cases.

natural maybe, but would absolutely annihilate our chances of landing this feature within the next year. Seriously, I'm pretty sure getting state-res working across rooms would be an entire PhD thesis in its own right.

If people want to take on that research, I would be very interested to read the outcome. Meanwhile, I'm not prepared to block Spaces on a feature that would take months of research. We need to work with the tools we have available today and that absolutely excludes cross-room state-res/event-auth. This is simply not up for debate.

In any case, this suggestion is off-topic for this comment thread, which is about "where does the bot run", not "how can we completely change the proposal so you don't need a bot".

@InfiniteWorldSoftware commented:

> So given that the admin bot is operated by the homeserver of the space-room admin which added the room to the space-room, wouldn't that mean massive inconsistency if the admin-ship of the space-room is spread amongst multiple servers and if one of those servers went down then partial/total permissions sync breakage with no proposed recovery?

Probably, unless the bot would exist on all participating servers. The problem then would be: what happens if the bots disagree?

If the bots don't exist on all participating homeservers, MSC1772 is really nothing more than a more complex /r0/groups in the spec.

@ara4n commented:

the bot is just used to keep PLs updated based on group memberships (which is a separate feature to the core spaces proposal anyway, and should be split out into a separate MSC - we only wrote it in one place to ensure it was considered when doing the core MSC). To say that MSC1772 is "just /groups" if the PL-management bot sits on a single server is completely wrong (/groups doesn't even have PL management).

> When you add multiple bots on multiple servers, you then run into the issue, that you need to do conflict resolution. Which means you are basically implementing state res a level above normal state res.

Yes, if you end up with multiple servers doing PL-management, you need some way of conflict resolution. However, this could be as simple as a social mechanism: if the admins of a room decide they want @:matrix.org rather than @:example.com to expand out the PLs, then they could make give the right bot power to do so. This feels like a perfectly practical pragmatic solution that avoids us being sucked into the complexity of cross-room state res.

@deepbluev7 commented 

> However, this could be as simple as a social mechanism: if the admins of a room decide they want @:matrix.org rather than @:example.com to expand out the PLs, then they could make give the right bot power to do so. This feels like a perfectly practical pragmatic solution that avoids us being sucked into the complexity of cross-room state res.

I guess that is a good point. In theory, as long as an admin on server B still exists and they have admin capabilities in all rooms, they should be able to change the group bot in all rooms, even if server A goes down. It does have the annoying side-effects of permission managements across rooms being broken until you notice A is down and I'm not really fond of that. At the small server scale servers often go down and there is not really one reliable server you can trust, unless you add one of the bigger ones. Those cases are at least recoverable though, while multiple bots have a few unrecoverable edge cases. For the first iteration that is probably completely fine and if it turns out to be an issue, since it doesn't need a lot of invasive changes to implement, it should be replaceable with a better solution, if someone can come up with one.

Reviewer 2: > Seriously, I'm pretty sure getting state-res working across rooms would be an entire PhD thesis in its own right.

Here is my overly simplistic solution, which works for both power levels and roles: throw away conflicting permission settings that apply at the same time, and then filter those that affects the room in concern from the remaining set, reinsert the discarded permission settings from the room in concern and then linearise through the resulting set.

localpart `@:example.com`.

This bot is then responsible for monitoring the `power_level_mappings` state,
and peeking into any spaces mentioned in the content. It can then issue new
`m.room.power_levels` events, updating the value of `auto_users`, whenever the
membership of the spaces in question changes.

It is possible that the admin bot is unable to perform the mapping (for
example, the space cannot be peeked; or the membership of the space is so large
that it cannot be expanded into a single `m.room.power_levels` event). It is
proposed that the bot could notify the room of any problems via
`m.room.message` messages of type `m.msgtype`.

Clearly, updating this event type is extremely powerful. It is expected that
access to it is itself restricted via `power_levels`. This could be enforced by
the admin bot so that no `m.room.power_levels` events are generated unless
`power_level_mappings` is appropriately restricted.

Some sort of rate-limiting may be required to handle the case where the mapped
space has a high rate of membership churn.

#### Alternatives

> Things that were considered and dismissed:

Author: @grinapo commented on 17 Nov 2020

I have read the above and dismissed ideas but I am not sure whether the following was in:

The space has an automatically existing user, like `@_space_whatever:example.com`, which joins all member rooms (unless forbidden).
The specific room admins may or may not assign an elevated power level to this user. (This may be a part of the room joining the space, or acknowledging it.) (It is advised not to give space_user a level equal to the room creator/highest level user.)

This space_user would act on space defined states, like

 * if the space defines a room as user_level_inheriting, then tries to set space userlevel for a user in the room, too.
 * if ban_inheriting, .... same.
 And same for whatever event we have.

Space admins who have power to set events in the space room may do that, and space_user would reflect these in rooms it has the power to (and possibly the room member events in the space room define as).

If a room admin disagrees with the space admin s/he kickbans the space user.

This machanism may let all and any events reflected in the member rooms without the need to tell now what these events may be in the future.

@richvdh commented on 20 Nov 2020 Member

we did consider a pseudo-user-per-space, but it felt a bit redundant. What would be the advantage over having a single pseudo-user which can work on all spaces?

Beyond the userid, I'm not clear how your suggestion differs from our existing proposal?

@grinapo commented on 23 Nov 2020

> we did consider a pseudo-user-per-space, but it felt a bit redundant. What would be the advantage over having a single pseudo-user which can work on all spaces?

*Why a "normal" [looking] user?*
Handled as a normal user: have to join the room to be there, have to possess levels to do actions, can be kicked or banned. This machanism is already in place and requires no additional spec.

*Why multiple users?*
Since a room can be a part of multiple spaces (as far as I understand) there would be no way to allow SpaceX but reject SpaceY in a specific room to make actions when the room is included in both.

>  Beyond the userid, I'm not clear how your suggestion differs from our existing proposal?

It was not clear to me how the proposal handles the possible differences (or power split) between space admin(s) and room admin(s).
Also I'd kind of prefer not to create more *spec* than necessary, and reuse already existing functions. If the proposal just does that then I was mistaken and superfluous.

@ara4n commented

per-space bots (or puppeting a real admin user for the space) is certainly interesting to just make the problem of "who is tweaking the PLs"? a purely social admin one - especially if you have multiple admins trying to compete for control of the same room, as per grin's example.

  yet is fundamental to the security of Matrix.

  In short, we believe such a change would require significant research and
  modelling. A solution based on such a foundation could not practically be
  implemented in the near future.

* Rather than defining the mapping in the room, define a template power-levels
  event in a parent space, which will be inherited by all child rooms. For example:

  ```js
  {
      "type": "m.space.child_power_levels",
      "state_key": "",
      "content": {
          // content as per regular power_levels event
      }
  }
  ```

  Problem 1: No automated mapping from space membership to user list, so the
  user list would have to be maintained manually. On the other hand, this
  could be fine in some situations, where we're just using the space to group
  together rooms, rather than as a user list.

  Problem 2: No scope for nuance, where different rooms have slightly
  different PLs.

  Problem 3: what happens to rooms where several spaces claim it as a child?
  They end up fighting?

  Problem 4: Doesn't allow for random room admins to delegate their PLs to a
  space without being admins in that space.

> * To implement the mapping, we require any user who is an admin in the

Author: @joepie91 commented:

The more I think about it, the more I feel that this - with some improvements - is a much better solution than the current proposal. It makes a lot of sense for powerlevel changes in rooms to be made by the person who *actually* made them in the space, much more sense than an anonymous bot user with ambient authority, IMO. It's also much easier to reason about.

It would also remove the need for spaces-as-roles from a powerlevels perspective (hopefully this can be eliminated for join rules in some way as well!), and make all the hard questions regarding whose homeserver is authorative for the bot user, completely obsolete.

Those authority questions in particular are not ones where I expect anyone to have a *good* answer any time soon, because - as I believe someone else pointed out in another thread - we will effectively just be reinventing a second layer of stateres there. I don't think that is desirable, especially considering the expressed desire to avoid changing the stateres algorithm due to its fragility.

An additional benefit of this approach, is that there is a semantically obvious way to copy over default powerlevel *requirements* too, not just user-powerlevel assignments. This doesn't seem to be part of the PL sync proposal yet, but IMO should be.

In terms of API design, a 'synchronized powerlevel change' can be expressed either as a regular powerlevel change on the space, or as a special operation / event type. I don't yet have a strong preference for either, and would be interested in arguments for/against either.

The situation of "cannot synchronize PLs to rooms that the person does not have access in" is IMO sufficiently handled by simply making it an error condition to apply synced PL changes to a space without having the necessary access in all child rooms, with an optional "then just do it for the rooms where it's possible" flag. This allows for eg. a "you do not have permission to update all rooms, do you want to continue anyway?" UI.

That having been said, once the PLs have been manually synchronized across rooms *once*, by each room's admins, it should from that point on be self-sustaining; any space-wide PL change that allows a new admin to change PLs, will also grant that new admin those permissions for rooms. Therefore, "cannot change in all rooms" should be a rare occurrence.

This also addresses the "what if someone is using it for a personal room collection" usecase, as in those circumstances the user simply won't be able to synchronize PL changes across those rooms *unless* they have the needed PL within those rooms; in which case they can still choose to do so "where possible", following the aforementioned UI.

To address the main objections here:

The problem of Bob not wanting to be a member of all such rooms, is pretty easy to to address: simply make "being a member of a room" not a prerequisite for setting powerlevels in a room *at all*. This requires a new room version, but only requires a change in authorization rules, *not* in the stateres algorithm, which makes it a low-risk change.

Likewise, since powerlevel and other permission changes are *already* gated by powerlevel restrictions anyway, and so would normally not be creatable by someone who doesn't have some sort of prior reputation in a room, permitting permission change events from non-joined users would be a safe change.

I'm thinking specifically of making the following change in the authorization rules, changing:

> If the sender's current membership state is not `join`, reject.

... to:

> If the sender's current membership is `join`, allow. If the sender's current membership is `leave` or `invite`, *and* type is `m.room.power_levels`, allow. Otherwise, reject.

(Further permission change events, like `m.room.history_visibility`, may also be worth rolling into this if synchronizing those is desirable too.)

The problem of Bob generating PLs every time someone comes and goes from the space... is this really a problem? Wouldn't the set of members with any non-default powerlevels at all normally be pretty limited, with those powerlevels being normally assigned?

It does not seem necessary to me to specify powerlevels for every user which did not explicitly receive a special one, and I don't think a user needs to be present in a room to receive a powerlevel assignment (at the time it is actually made on a space-wide level)? So there should be no need to change any powerlevels upon join/leave at all.

The problem of people not being able to mirror a space - is that really true? As far as I can tell, that's precisely what this approach *would* allow for, and with sensible PL propagation semantics too.

  space (ie, anyone who has permission to change the access rights in the
  space) to also be admins and members of any child rooms.

  Say Bob is an admin in #doglovers and makes a change that should be
  propagated to all children of that space. His server is then responsible
  for generating a power-levels event on his behalf for each room.

  Problem 1: Bob may not want to be a member of all such rooms.

  Problem 2: It will feel odd that Bob's user is seen to be generating PL
  events every time someone comes and goes from the space.

  Problem 3: It doesn't allow users to set up their own rooms to mirror a

>   space, without having any particular control in that space (though it is

Author: @MadLittleMods asks "What does mirroring a space mean?".  @richvdh, any idea?

Reviewer: sorry, this wasn't terribly clear. I'm talking about the idea that you want your PLs or memberships in a room to be inherited from a space:

How do I set up a company internal room without being an admin in the company space?

Reviewer 3: @richvdh Ahhh, "inherit from a space" makes this line a lot more clear. And your example makes it even more obvious. We should add it to the MSC too ⏩

    haven't been designed to work in rooms in spaces?

  * Require that even regular PLs go through the automated mapper, by making
    them an explicit input to that mapper, for example with entries in the
    `m.room.power_level_mappings` event suggested above.

    Problem: Requires clients to distinguish between rooms where there is an
    automated mapper, and those where the client should manipulate the PLs
    directly. (Maybe that's not so bad? The presence of the `mappings` event
    should be enough? But still sucks that there are two ways to do the same
    thing, and clients which don't support spaces will get it wrong.)

### Restricting room membership based on space membership

A desirable feature is to give room admins the power to restrict membership of
their room based on the membership of spaces (for example, "members of the
#doglovers space can join this room without an invitation"<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup>).

We could represent the allowed spaces with additional content in the
`m.room.join_rules` event. For example:

```js
{
    "type": "m.room.join_rules",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "join_rule": "public",

>         "allow": [

Author: @Sorunome commented: 
> Again, we might want to flesh out #2812 more, as, well, "access to a room" is a permission and we are re-implementing role-based permissions here by creating a bunch of empty rooms

Reviewer 4: Soru posted a lengthy comment over [here](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2812#discussion_r602194042) on why she thinks permission roles are the way to go

The `allow` key applies a restriction to the `public` join rule, so that
only users satisfying one or more of the requirements should be allowed to
join. Additionally, users who have received an explicit `invite` event are
allowed to join<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>. If the `allow` key is an
empty list (or not a list at all), no users are allowed to join without an
invite.

Unlike the regular `invite` join rule, the restriction cannot be enforced over
federation by event authorization, so servers in the room are trusted not to
allow invalid users to join.<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup>

When a server receives a `/join` request from a client or a
`/make_join`/`/send_join` request from a server, the request should only be
permitted if the user has a valid invite or is in one of the listed spaces
(established by peeking).

XXX: redacting the join_rules above will reset the room to public, which feels dangerous?

A new room version is not absolutely required here, but may be advisable to
ensure that servers that do not support `allow` do not join the room
(and would also allow us to tweak the redaction rules to avoid the foot-gun).

#### Kicking users out when they leave the allowed space

> XXX: this will probably be a future extension, rather than part of the initial

Author: @MadLittleMods comments: This part feels weird to me. `m.room.join_rules` seems like it should govern joins, not existing room membership.

Reviewer 5: Note that restricting room membership based on space membership has been moved to [MSC3083](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3083). I've also moved this to a "future extension" instead of including it in that MSC.

Reviewer 3: Continued my thoughts in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3083/files#r628612506

implementation of `allow`.

In the above example, suppose `@bob:server.example` leaves `!users:example.org`:
they should be removed from the room. One option is to leave the departure up
to Bob's server `server.example`, but this places a relatively high level of trust
in that server. Additionally, if `server.example` were offline, other users in
the room would still see Bob in the room (and their servers would attempt to
send message traffic to it).

Instead, we make the removal the responsibility of the room's admin bot (see
above): the bot is expected to peek into any spaces in `allow` and kick
any users who are members of the room and leave the union of the allowed
spaces.

(XXX: should users in a space be kicked when that space is removed from the
`allow` list? We think not, by analogy with what happens when you switch
the join rules from `public` to `invite`.)

One problem here is that it will lead to users who joined via an invite being

> kicked. For example:

Author: @Sorunome comments: "This might actually be desirable. better kick, and if it was a mistake, bob can be re-invited"

Reviewer 5: Note that restricting room membership based on space membership has been moved to [MSC3083](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3083). I've moved the bits about kicking members to a "future extension" though. So for now this won't be a concern.

# Proposal for Group Access Control via Spaces in Matrix

MSC1772 defines Spaces: a new way to define groups of users and rooms in
Matrix by describing them as a room.  Originally MSC1772 attempted to define
how you could apply permissions to Matrix rooms based on the membership of a
space. However, this is effectively a separate concern from how you model spaces
themselves, and so has been split out into a this separate MSC.

> ## Goals:

Reviewer 4: What about access control the other way (maybe need in work arose for that, not entirely sure yet if our issue would be solved by this):

If you are in a room, you are allowed to enter its space, however, if you are in a space, you are not necessarily allowed to enter its room

the admin bot so that no `m.room.power_levels` events are generated unless
`power_level_mappings` is appropriately restricted.

Some sort of rate-limiting may be required to handle the case where the mapped
space has a high rate of membership churn.

#### Alternatives

Things that were considered and dismissed:

* Extend the auth rules to include state from other rooms. Although this feels
  cleaner, a robust implementation would be a hugely complicated
  undertaking. In particular, room state resolution is closely linked to event
  authorisation, and is already highly complex and hard to reason about, and
  yet is fundamental to the security of Matrix.

  In short, we believe such a change would require significant research and
  modelling. A solution based on such a foundation could not practically be
  implemented in the near future.

* Rather than defining the mapping in the room, define a template power-levels
  event in a parent space, which will be inherited by all child rooms. For example:

  ```js
  {
      "type": "m.space.child_power_levels",
      "state_key": "",
      "content": {
          // content as per regular power_levels event
      }
  }

>   ```

Reviewer 2: This is the alternative I support the most.

            }
        }
    }
    ```

    ... or stored in a separate event. Clients would be responsible for updating
    both copies of the manually-assigned PLs on change.

    Problem: Requiring clients to make two changes feels fragile. What if they
    get it wrong? what if they don't know about the second copy because they
    haven't been designed to work in rooms in spaces?

  * Require that even regular PLs go through the automated mapper, by making
    them an explicit input to that mapper, for example with entries in the
    `m.room.power_level_mappings` event suggested above.

    Problem: Requires clients to distinguish between rooms where there is an
    automated mapper, and those where the client should manipulate the PLs
    directly. (Maybe that's not so bad? The presence of the `mappings` event
    should be enough? But still sucks that there are two ways to do the same
    thing, and clients which don't support spaces will get it wrong.)

### Restricting room membership based on space membership

A desirable feature is to give room admins the power to restrict membership of
their room based on the membership of spaces (for example, "members of the

> #doglovers space can join this room without an invitation"<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup>).

Reviewer 6: FYI, the various footnotes in this proposal have not made it across from https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/matthew/msc1772/proposals/1772-groups-as-rooms.md, and so are effectively dead references now.

Reviewer: fixed in 49876ce0

We could represent the allowed spaces with additional content in the
`m.room.join_rules` event. For example:

```js
{
    "type": "m.room.join_rules",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "join_rule": "public",
        "allow": [
            {
                "space": "!mods:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"],
            },
            {
                "space": "!users:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"],
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

> The `allow` key applies a restriction to the `public` join rule, so that

Reviewer 6: I don't think this is right. Defining it as a restriction to a `public` join rule makes it fail open/unsafely; if an implementation is not (yet) aware of these semantics, it will incorrectly treat a restricted room as a fully public one. The "redacting join rules" issue below is a variant of this same problem.

Instead, it should be defined as an exception to an `invite` join rule, where a room is invite-only, but anyone listed in the `allow`ed exceptions is considered to be implicitly invited, for the purpose of determining whether a join is authorized. This is also how eg. invite exceptions on IRC work.

This also simplifies the semantics of an empty or non-existent list; instead of having a totally different semantic meaning for the join rule depending on whether the list is empty/invalid vs. non-existent, all of those cases will just have the same meaning of "there are no exceptions to the invite requirement".

Reviewer: I was struggling to remember why we decided it was better to start with `join_rule: public` and lock it down, rather than `join_rule: invite` and open it up.

I think the answer amounts to: from the perspective of the [auth rules](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v1#authorization-rules), the expected behaviour is the same as that of `join_rule: public`, because the `allow` restrictions cannot be enforced post-hoc. If we simply used `invite` here, we would have to weaken the auth rules so that you would no longer need to hold an invite to join the room, which I am reluctant to do.

So, from the auth rules' point of view, `public` makes more sense.

However, as well as @joepie91's point about failing safely and making redactions work right, I'm a bit worried that this is going to be very confusing for everybody.

I wonder if, for clarity as much as anything else, we should introduce a different `join_rule` - say, `restricted` - to reflect the fact that what we have is a cross between `invite` and `public`? in this world:
 * `public`: anyone can join, subject to `ban` and `server_acls`, as today
 * `invite`: only people with membership `invite` can join, as today
 * `restricted`: the same as `public` from the perspective of the auth rules, but with the additional caveat that servers are expected to check the `allow` rules before generating a `join` event (whether for a local or a remote user).

Since we're talking about needing a new room version for this anyway, it seems like a reasonable thing to do?

Reviewer 2: >  If we simply used invite here, we would have to weaken the auth rules so that you would no longer need to hold an invite to join the room, which I am reluctant to do.

So, you oppose the concept of invite exemptions, right?

Reviewer: > invite exemptions

for the 150th time, I find myself wondering what you are talking about. Please explain what you are proposing in more than two words, so that we can have a sensible discussion about it.

Reviewer 6: @richvdh Right, I hadn't considered the problem of the stateres algorithm not having access to the necessary data for validating an `allow`-based join. In that light, I think your suggestion of a new dedicated `join_rule` sounds like a good solution to me, and I don't see any obvious security issues with that.

Reviewer 2: > I find myself wondering what you are talking about. 

If you have an `invite` join rule, and include an allow field for users that do not require invite; that means you exempt those users from invite requirement. That is what invite exemption is.

Reviewer: > If you have an invite join rule, and include an allow field for users that do not require invite;

Well, that makes it the 151st time. Are you proposing explicitly listing the users who are permitted to join without an invite? Or something else?

Reviewer 2: > Are you proposing explicitly listing the users who are permitted to join without an invite?

Yes, exactly that, and if you list a room instead, *all members of that room* would.

Reviewer: if you list a room instead, that means that (a) other homeservers have to be in that room, to check the membership (b) given the membership of a room is not fixed, the auth rules would give different results depending on when you run them, which means that different homeservers might reach different conclusions on which events are allowed in the room, and hence what the state of the room is, and pretty soon the entire fabric of the room breaks down. Honestly, I'm getting bored of explaining this. Please see the many, many threads on MSC1772 where this has been discussed previously.

Reviewer 5: Thanks for your thoughts! Based on these concerns (and the various factors this MSC tries to handle), the part of this MSC about restricting room membership based on space membership has been moved to [MSC3083](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3083). This incorporates the modified join rule as discussed above!

`auto_users` is subject to all of the same authorization checks as the existing
`users` key (see https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v1#authorization-rules,
paragraphs 10a, 10d, 10e).

This change necessitates a new room version.

#### Representing the mapping from spaces to power levels

The desired mapping from spaces to power levels is defined in a new state
event type, `m.room.power_level_mappings`, set in the room whose PLs are being
manipulated. The content should contain a `mappings` key which is an
ordered list, for example:

```js
{
    "type": "m.room.power_level_mappings",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "mappings": [
            {
                "space": "!mods:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"],
                "power_level": 50
            },
            {
                "space": "!users:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"],
                "power_level": 1
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

This means that a new `m.room.power_levels` event would be generated whenever
the membership of either `!mods` or `!users` changes. If a user is in both
spaces, `!mods` takes priority because that is listed first.

> If `mappings` is not a list, the whole event is ignored. Any entries in the list
> which do not match the expected format are ignored.

Reviewer 2: Reject as this affects the server-side authorisation checks
```suggestion
If `mappings` is not a list, the whole event is ill-formed. Any entries in the list
which do not match the expected format are ill-formed.
```

* Maintain some sort of pre-approved list as the space membership changes in a
  similar way to the PL mapping, possibly via a new membership state.

  Could lead to a lot of membership churn, from a centralised control point.

* Base it on invite-only rooms, and generate invite events on the fly. Kind-of
  ok, except that we'd want the invites to be seen as having a sender of a
  management bot rather than an arbitrary user, which would mean that all joins
  would have to go through that one server (even from servers that were already
  participating in the room), which feels a bit grim. We could have multiple
  admin bots to mitigate this, but it gets a bit messy.

* Change the way that `allow` and invites interact, so that an invite
  does not exempt you from the `allow` requirements. This would be
  simpler to implement, but probably doesn't match the expected UX.

* Put the `allow` rules in a separate event? This is attractive because
  `join_rules` are involved in event auth and hence state resolution, and the
  fewer events that state res has to grapple with the better. However, doing
  this would probably require us to come up with a new `join_rule` state to

>   tell servers to go and look for the allowed spaces.

Reviewer: As [above](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2962#discussion_r601446160), there are other advantages to coming up with a new join rule. I think we should give serious consideration to this.

Reviewer 5: Note that restricting room membership based on space membership has been moved to [MSC3083](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3083).

> 

Reviewer: @clokep can you remove all this in favour of a link to MSC3083?

Reviewer 5: Done in 0deb95466fe450e71c00016ff162547fd388f553.
